---
layout: base
---
# Auckland: walkability vs. ethnicity
<figure>
<blockquote class="epigraph">I take infinite pains to know all the phenomena of the spring, for instance, thinking that I have here the entire poem, and then, to my chagrin, I hear that it is but an imperfect copy that I possess and have read, that my ancestors have torn out many of the first leaves and grandest passages, and mutilated it in many places. I should not like to think that some demigod had come before me and picked out some of the best of the stars. I wish to know an entire heaven and an entire earth.</blockquote>
<figcaption><a href="https://thoreau.library.ucsb.edu/writings_journals_pdfs/TMS20newTR.pdf" target="_blank">Henry David Thoreau, <cite>Journal</cite></a></figcaption>
</figure>
I have had a long-standing and currently ongoing passion for sustainable urban design and pedestrianization, and in my casual self-study I often hear about Auckland, New Zealand. It is portrayed in a good light for its *walkability and high efficiency, and it even has a perfect Walk Score*.
<div class="notice"><strong>Work in progress!</strong> Much of what you read won't make sense because it's just being used to test formatting.</div>
Upon hearing this, I thought of Amsterdam: an example of ideal walking conditions and infrastructure. I hold Amsterdam in high regard for this, but sometimes I hear **some seemingly reasonable arguments about how their lack of diversity in terms of class and race facilitates their ideal state**. I haven’t looked into Amsterdam's case specifically, but I figured the same might be true for Auckland due to New Zealand’s history of European colonization.

As it turns out, Auckland is not as walkable as it is often made out to be, and even with a brief glance at the data it is clear that ethnicity plays a large role in the heterogeneous ward infrastructure throughout the city. When people talk about Auckland, they’re only talking about one small section of the city, just as people really mean Boston when they talk about Massachusetts.
<figure>
<blockquote>It will be said that, while a little leisure is pleasant, men would not know how to fill their days if they had only four hours of work out of the twenty-four. In so far as this is true in the modern world, it is a condemnation of our civilization; it would not have been true at any earlier period. There was formerly a capacity for light-heartedness and play which has been to some extent inhibited by the cult of efficiency. The modern man thinks that everything ought to be done for the sake of something else, and never for its own sake.</blockquote>
<figcaption><a href="https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bertrand-russell-in-praise-of-idleness-11-02-05-22-00-46.html" target="_blank">Bertrand Russell, <cite>In Praise of Idleness</cite></a></figcaption>
</figure>
I refer to this spreadsheet which compiles data from Auckland’s 2018 census by ward. I also use Auckland’s zoning map and unitary plan. Walkability is interpreted from the main modes of transportation that people take to work; if more people walk, it’s more walkable. This is a simple quantitative metric that has an advantage over Walk Score: factors that aren’t considered in Walk Score such as sidewalk conditions and crime rates inherently factor into the number of people walking to work. Thus, it is less so about the time it takes to walk and more so about whether people will even do it, although the former does impact the latter.

## Let’s look at the data.
The data shows that median personal income (MPI) is lower in areas that have higher proportions of ethnic Polynesians. This trend is even clearer when excluding Māori peoples from that proportion. The Asian proportion of these areas generally seems to have no effect, but it is notable that Howick, the ward with the highest proportion of Asians, is one of the least walkable of Auckland along with the majority Polynesian wards Manukau and Manurewa-Papakura. All of these wards share primarily suburban infrastructure and large industrial zones in common.

It is important to consider that wards like Rodney and Franklin are massive and far from the city center, making them naturally less walkable and thus less comparable in terms of statistics.

[Auckland’s rail system](https://at.govt.nz/bus-train-ferry/train-services/auckland-train-network/){:target="_blank"} is not particularly extensive, and of its few branches they all seem to avoid the [most densely populated areas](https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=8cb9e06473414676858fa54891181d28){:target="_blank"}. Howick in particular, with a population of 146,000, is completely devoid of rail and has few bus stops. There is a glaring exception to the previously established correlation between low MPI and high Polynesian population, and that is the Maungakiekie-Tamaki ward. By looking at a population density map of the region, we can see that the Western Line passes by the most densely populated neighborhoods in the ward. This explains its high transit usage and perhaps the gap in MPI between it and the other majority-Polynesian wards.

This is still a flawed perspective as it only takes distance from work into consideration; a New Zealand-wide study found that socioeconomically deprived neighborhoods tend to have more walkable features. This is based on commute times to local amenities like supermarkets. However, covering such a wide scope of land means that the study does not directly address the suburbs in Auckland.

In observing the effects of walkability on education, there is a clear correlation between the percentage of qualified people and the percentage of people that walk to work. The Waitemata and Gulf ward stands at the top of this statistic, winning in almost every qualification level. Interestingly, Howick is in the middle in terms of education yet has the worst walkability. This aligns with findings of a "U-shaped relationship between walkability and education, such that the most disadvantaged and the most advantaged neighborhoods are the most walkable, while the typical middle-class majority lives in neighborhoods that are the least walkable." The Whau and Maungakiekie-Tamaki wards don’t fall into this pattern because of their incidentally good transit accessibility.

The reason that Waitemata and Gulf sticks out is because it contains Auckland’s central business district. In the unitary plan, this area is designated as a “City Centre” zone which allows for skyscrapers and other tall developments. It also enforces mixed-use capabilities on ground-level buildings. Skyscrapers and mixed-use developments are important for their space efficiency; they have a high taxable revenue per acre, meaning Auckland makes more money off of them to funnel back into public works. Suburban areas like Howick, Manukau, and Manurewa-Papakura have minuscule and sometimes negative taxable revenues per acre due to high maintenance costs inherent in low-density sprawl, requiring them to be subsidized by more efficient and profitable regions like Auckland’s central business district.
## Why is it like this?
<figure>
<blockquote class="epigraph">[P]olitical language has to consist largely of euphemism, question-begging and sheer cloudy vagueness. Defenceless villages are bombarded from the air, the inhabitants driven out into the countryside, the cattle machine-gunned, the huts set on fire with incendiary bullets: this is called pacification. Millions of peasants are robbed of their farms and sent trudging along the roads with no more than they can carry: this is called transfer of population or rectification of frontiers. People are imprisoned for years without trial, or shot in the back of the neck or sent to die of scurvy in Arctic lumber camps: this is called elimination of unreliable elements. Such phraseology is needed if one wants to name things without calling up mental pictures of them.</blockquote>
<figcaption><a href="https://orwell.ru/library/essays/politics/english/e_polit" target="_blank">George Orwell, <cite>Poltiics and the English Language</cite></a></figcaption>
</figure>
Manukau and Manurewa-Papakura have the lowest MPIs, lowest walkabilities, and highest polynesian populations. On top of this, they also have the highest percentage of unqualified people. The presence of industrial zones in these areas contributes to noise pollution, air pollution, and lowered aesthetics, all of which contribute to worse mental health. Disadvantaged neighborhoods have been found to have worse aesthetics, but typically they have better street connectivity, and by extension, walkability. So why are these disadvantaged wards so poor in terms of their walkability?

This comes down to state housing developments. To accommodate for (and “integrate”) the poorest citizens—often Māori—several government schemes were hatched to produce high quality affordable housing. Much of these state housing suburbs were built right after World War II, and most of them, as you would guess, are in the eastern and southeastern parts of Auckland where we see the highest concentration of polynesians. These developments worked well enough for their purposes, but their efficiency cannot come close to apartment buildings. So many of these suburbs were built, contributing greatly to sprawl and spreading the city out to the unwalkable state it is in now. By comparison, disadvantaged neighborhoods in the United States are colloquially referred to as the “inner city” or the “ghetto” and are made up almost exclusively of apartment buildings. This may explain the inconsistency in findings.

While apartment buildings may have been more space-efficient, they would likely not have been as well-received. State houses certainly had issues that overlooked Māori cultural values and traditions (e.g. having a washing machine next to the kitchen sink), but they are not as jarringly different to traditional Māori housing as apartment buildings may be. Māori people have generally lived in homes with their extended families. This requires a lot of space (even the state houses were not sufficiently large enough for many) that an apartment would not be able to provide. Thus, Auckland falls into the same car-dependency pit as most western nations do.
## Why should I care?
Urban land-use configuration has a significant impact on everyone residing within or passing through a space. Your ease of access to amenities or destinations defines your routine, your opportunities, and your options. Do you have locally-owned restaurants nearby, or just fast food drive-throughs? Do you live near a park or a library? Are you a short walk from a grocery store or must you drive each time? Is there any human or animal life outside?

Auckland’s problem is not one of a kind. Land-use policies in the United States began as *de jure* segregation and developed the country into the huge non-place that it is today. My favorite way to put this is: think about the young American soldiers spilling blood fighting for their country. What is their last thought of home? It better not be a billboard-laden highway, or the sound of the freeway, or the staticity of the suburbs. The city should breathe life into you as you breathe life into it. Otherwise, it’s not worth caring about; not worth fighting for.

It is especially sad that this is the result of bigotry, both in the United States and in Australia. There is no freedom in requiring a car to get around. There is no community beyond superficial in a cul-de-sac. There is no joy in stepping out for a walk in the midst of all of the air and sound pollution caused by cars. You probably don’t even have a destination to walk to. You might not even have a sidewalk to walk on.

A city will flourish with its people and its people will flourish with the city. It is a two-way dynamic. This is why it is important to pay more attention to places like eastern Auckland, and my home, Lynn, Massachusetts. It will directly impact your own life, the lives of those around you, and the lives of the next generation.
